---
layout : default
title : API - The package GL.Immediate
packages :
  - GL.Immediate
permalink: gl-immediate.html
---

# The package `GL.Immediate`

This package provides the tools to immediately push OpenGL primitives into the OpenGL
pipeline. This functionality has been deprecated with OpenGL 3.0 because it has severe
performance issues. In real software, you want to use Vertex Buffer Objects (VBOs). This
package is provided to give beginners an easy start with OpenGLAda.

To input vertices into the OpenGL pipeline, you have to create an `Input_Token` that
defines the connection between the vertices you supply. Creating such a token will tell
OpenGL to expect vertices. While the token lives, you must not call any OpenCLAda
subprograms except those in `GL.Immediate` (actually, you may call subprograms that are
implemented by OpenCLAda itself, like the operators on vectors and matrices).

When the token is destroyed, the connection to the OpenGL pipeline is closed. If any
errors are encountered during the lifetime of the token, they will be raised when the
token is destroyed. Here is a example of how using a token looks like:

<?prettify lang=ada?>

    declare
       Token : Input_Token := Start (Line_Strip);
    begin
       Token.Add_Vertex (Vector'(-0.5, 0.5, 0.5, 1.0));
       Token.Add_Vertex (Vector'(0.5, 0.5, 0.5, 1.0));
       Token.Add_Vertex (Vector'(0.5, -0.5, 0.5, 1.0));
       Token.Add_Vertex (Vector'(-0.5, -0.5, 0.5, 1.0));
       Token.Add_Vertex (Vector'(-0.5, 0.5, 0.5, 1.0));
    end; -- at this point, the token gets destroyed.

The token gets destroyed automatically by means of `Ada.Finalization.Limited_Controlled`.
Calling `Finalize` manually will result in an exception. Declaring multiple tokens at the
same time also won't work.

The additional setter and getter subprograms in this package can be used without a token,
but also while a token is active.