---
layout : default
title : API - The package GL.Objects.Textures
packages :
  - GL.Objects.Textures
api: true
permalink: gl-objects-textures.html
---

# The package `GL.Objects.Textures`

Textures are basically images stored in OpenGL memory. They have tons of features,
therefore this package is quite big.

## Targets

Texture targets are defined in the package `GL.Objects.Textures.Targets`. The basic
texture target type is `Texture_Proxy`. A texture proxy is something that has some
method to create it in OpenGL memory, and you can then query its parameters. A *pure*
texture proxy does not actually allocate any memory, but instead just tells you the
dimensions and other attributes a texture would created with *if* you created it with
the parameters you gave. So for example, if you call:

    GL.Objects.Textures.Targets.Texture_2D_Proxy.Load_Empty_Texture

You can afterwards query the parameters a texture would have if you created it with:

    GL.Objects.Textures.Targets.Texture_2D.Load_Empty_Texture

You cannot bind a texture object to a pure proxy texture, only to an actual
`Texture_Target`, which derives from `Texture_Proxy`. In the second code line from
above, `Texture_2D` is such an actual texture target.

For cube map textures, there are special targets:

    GL.Objects.Textures.Targets.Texture_Cube_Map_Positive_X
    GL.Objects.Textures.Targets.Texture_Cube_Map_Negative_X
    GL.Objects.Textures.Targets.Texture_Cube_Map_Positive_Y
    GL.Objects.Textures.Targets.Texture_Cube_Map_Negative_Y
    GL.Objects.Textures.Targets.Texture_Cube_Map_Positive_Z
    GL.Objects.Textures.Targets.Texture_Cube_Map_Negative_Z

These are proxy textures as you cannot bind any texture to them, *but* you can
actually create parts of the texture currently bound to

    GL.Objects.Textures.Targets.Texture_Cube_Map

with them, so they are not *pure* proxy textures.

**Note:** The definition of `Texture_Proxy` and `Texture_Target` are currently fully
exposed due to a [bug in GNAT][1]. Please use them as if they were indefinite private
types; don't instantiate own variables with these types.

## Textures

As with all OpenGL objects, you first have to call `Initialize_Id` before you can use
a texture object. Afterwards, you can bind it to any of the available texture targets
(be aware that it depends on the OpenGL version of your OpenGL context which targets
are available).

You can use the SOIL library which is an optional part of OpenGLAda to load image files
into texture objects. Keep in mind that with the (deprecated) fixed pixel pipeline, you
need to do

    GL.Toggles.Enable (GL.Toggles.Texture_2D)

to use 2D textures, same for other texture types.

 [1]: http://gcc.gnu.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=58881